3 Surprising Effects of Eating Oatmeal Every Week
You won’t view it the same after reading this.
Alyssa Atkinson
Alyssa Atkinson
Follow
Feb 21 · 5 min read



Image for post
Photo by Alex Motoc on Unsplash
I have been eating oatmeal for quite some time. Oatmeal began as my go-to meal on cross-country race days in high school, but it did not become one of my breakfast staples until years later.
This is because I usually opted for something like sugar cereal for breakfast in high school. It tasted delicious, and I felt good for an hour or two. Then, I would experience that dreadful crash and exhaustion that comes with filling up on sugar for breakfast every day.
When I went off to college, I finally decided to make a change. Oatmeal became my go-to breakfast due to its versatility, inexpensive cost, and delicious taste when loaded up with fresh fruit and peanut butter.
In addition to that, it happened to be one of the few options I could eat at the dining hall my freshman year, when I was forced to be on the campus meal plan (I was a vegetarian at the time and a lot of the dishes contained meat).
When I decided to go vegan my sophomore year of college, it remained one of my breakfast essentials. Now, five years later, it is still a food that I eat 4–5 times each week as a busy individual. Oatmeal is my work day go-to, and I do not see that changing any time soon.
Still, for years I wondered about the potential effects of eating oatmeal frequently. So, I dove into the research and found some surprising results. Here they are.
1. Oatmeal nourishes you in this way.
Oats provide a powerful source of a number of nutrients, including a ton of vitamins and minerals. They also provide a healthy balance of macronutrients — they contain a good source of carbs and protein. When topped with nuts, nut butter, or seeds, they complete the macronutrient profile with extra protein and a source of healthy fat.
In fact,
“One cup of cooked oatmeal [about 1/2 cup dry] contains about 150 calories, four grams of fiber (about half soluble and half insoluble), and six grams of protein…Nutrient-rich oatmeal contains thiamine, magnesium, phosphorus, zinc, manganese, selenium, and iron.”
These key vitamins and minerals, along with the balanced macronutrient profile, make oatmeal an ideal breakfast option to kickstart your day with and keep you satisfied for longer.
2. It gives you these key antioxidants.
Even if you were already aware of the incredible nutrient profile of oatmeal, you may not have known that oats actually contain a number of powerful antioxidants:
“Whole oats are high in antioxidants and beneficial plant compounds called polyphenols. Most notable is a unique group of antioxidants called avenanthramides, which are almost solely found in oats. Avenanthramides may help lower blood pressure levels by increasing the production of nitric oxide. This gas molecule helps dilate blood vessels and leads to better blood flow. In addition, avenanthramides have anti-inflammatory and anti-itching effects.”
The incredible yet hard to find antioxidants found in oats can boost your health by potentially lowering blood pressure and improving blood flow. This is another surprising yet beneficial effect of consuming oatmeal regularly that should not be overlooked.
Plus, when you combine oatmeal with other antioxidant containing fruits, like fresh or frozen berries, you will get an even richer nutrient profile from your daily or weekly oatmeal intake.
I love to add fresh or frozen blueberries or strawberries to the top of my oatmeal bowl, along with cinnamon and a scoop of nut butter.
When you microwave the berries and mix them in with the oats, then add the peanut butter, it tastes like eating a peanut butter and jelly flavor combination for breakfast.
3. It can improve your cholesterol levels in two ways.
Oatmeal has the power to positively impact your cholesterol levels in two different ways. One effect of consuming oatmeal regularly affects your cholesterol levels overall. The other effect actually provides protection against damage.
Both of these impacts are especially important, since high blood cholesterol increases your risk of death from disease, namely heart disease. In fact,
“Heart disease is the leading cause of death globally. One major risk factor is high blood cholesterol. Many studies have shown that the beta-glucan fiber in oats is effective at reducing both total and LDL cholesterol levels. Beta-glucan may increase the excretion of cholesterol-rich bile, thereby reducing circulating levels of cholesterol in the blood.”
Therefore, the beta-glucan found in oats is believed to provide benefits in regards to reducing cholesterol levels. Furthermore, oats have the potential to provide protection against damage:
“Oxidation of LDL (the “bad”) cholesterol, which occurs when LDL reacts with free radicals, is another crucial step in the progression of heart disease. It produces inflammation in arteries, damages tissues and can raise the risk of heart attacks and strokes. One study reports that antioxidants in oats work together with vitamin C to prevent LDL oxidation.”
Therefore, the regular consumption of oatmeal has the potential to protect your heart in a number of meaningful ways.
So, why don’t more people eat oatmeal?
After reading about these surprising benefits, this is probably one of the top questions you are asking yourself. Honestly, I think it comes down to two simple facts — people don’t like the taste, or they don’t know how to make oatmeal in an enjoyable way.
So, here are a few quick and easy fixes:
Determine what consistency you enjoy — thicker oats or thinner/creamier oats. Then, add less or more water to reach that consistency.
Add your favorite toppings. Toppings are the main way to flavor your oatmeal. If you eat it plain, odds are, you aren’t going to find it super tasty. However, with some fresh fruit and nut butter, not only will it taste amazing, but you will also boost the nutrient profile.
If you can master those two things, you will likely find oatmeal to be a lot more enjoyable, and so you will actually look forward to eating it consistently. If you need some healthy meal ideas (one of which is my recipe for healthy and delicious brownie batter oatmeal), check out my YouTube video below for five healthy meals I eat every week:

Video: Alyssa Atkinson
Final Thoughts
The food you choose to fuel your body with will have a crucial impact on how you feel overall every single day.
I can tell the difference between when I am fueling my body with nourishing foods that make me feel good, and when I am lacking nutrients because I’m opting for convenience and packaged foods. Having oatmeal for breakfast always helps me start my day off right.
So, if you are in need of a healthy, inexpensive, filling, and versatile breakfast option, give oatmeal a try. You just might be pleasantly surprised.
Subscribe to my YouTube channel here for healthy vegan recipes & more!
